hello everyone and welcome back to base
the podcast today we have two very
special guests this power couple are
absolute authorities in the fitness
industry particularly in the field of
nutrition we have dr. lane Norton he's
one of the most well respected nutrition
experts in the world he has a PhD in
nutritional science he's a pro natural
bodybuilder a USA powerlifting national
champion he's the founder of bio lane
and joining Lane is his prettier half
our fellow Aussie his beautiful wife
Holly Baxter Holly has a master's degree
in Dietetics she's the author of the
reverse dieting guide a WBFF Pro fitness
model and combined they are the founders
of the newly launched up the carbon diet
coach welcome to the show guys
so I don't know if you guys remember but
I worked with you both on my own
nutrition like quite a few years ago
which was insane I learned so much from
you guys and I know when we started
talking about having a nutrition expert
on our podcast you guys were obviously
collectively well obviously the first
people that came to our mind so there
was no other way about this we wanted
you guys on here but tell us a little
bit about yourselves and your philosophy
around nutrition you know it's
interesting when I first got into like
researching nutrition and and going into
my PhD I kind of had this idea that
doing research would leave me kind of
down the one true path to find you know
the the diet that everybody should be on
and how we should all do things and
what's interesting is after and I'm sure
Sebastian can relate to this as a
strength coach after working with a lot
of people I just saw so many different
things works and I became a pragmatist
and just said you know the best diet is
probably the one I can get people to
stick to for the most part I mean if you
get into athletic performance and those
sorts of things obviously you know if
you've got endurance athlete you know
putting them on a low carbohydrate diet
it's probably not the best thing you can
do you know their we know certain things
but I just got to the point where I saw
so many different people get results
doing so many different things and the
one consistent thing was that I saw was
adherence that people just found
something that they were able to really
stick to it
tools to improve that you know habits
you know we think higher protein and
fiber seems to be better it's more
satiating those sorts of things but yeah
I just saw so many things work there's
also a good lesson in taking trying to
take my own bias out of the equation and
say you know this this particular way of
doing things work for me I really like
it that means nothing for everybody else
I think a lot of people miss that and
they miss it and I'm sure Sebastian
speak this and strength training too one
of the biggest things you have to do is
take your ego out of it in terms of what
you like and find what works for the
particular athlete and I've found that
too with nutrition is okay you know I
like flexible dieting I like a little
bit more carbohydrate compared to fat I
like you know X Y Z there are some
people who are going to vibe with that
but there's also a lot of people who are
kind of vibe with that and are gonna
need a completely different approach and
I think over the course of you know 15
years of coaching people I really came
full circle and stopped looking at
things as this is the way you need to do
it let's always do it this way and I
started looking as everything is tools
in a tool belt
and why would I limit my tool belt now I
probably use my screwdriver a lot more
than my jackhammer but I've still got my
jackhammer when I need it and that's
kind of how I approach things like let
me just give you one example and then
I'll let my lovely wife take over but
like fasted cardio for example when I
was young and first getting into this do
my first bodybuilding show I did fasted
cardio I got very lean I said see
everybody should do fasted cardio it
burns more fat all this kind of stuff
then I saw some scientific data that
showed that it was no better and we
started thinking maybe it's worse
because you're not actually losing more
fat based on the data and maybe it's
more catabolic and maybe get cortisol
rise all this kind of stuff so then I
was completely against fasted cardio
told everybody they were stupid they
should never do it it's a terrible idea
and then coming full circle I kind of
looked at it said well if somebody is an
emergency room doctor and who
and they gotta get up at 5:00 a.m. it's
the only time they can get their
activity in they get GI distress if they
have anything before they go do exercise
then maybe fasted cardio makes sense for
them you know and it's kind of that full
circle okay it's not a tool I pull out
all the time but in certain situations
it can be a useful tool so coming from a
background of having disordered 18 so
when I was really young I was a
top-level elite athlete competing it you
know competing for Australia and I think
I kind of moved into the fitness
community with you know there must be
this one particular pathway that's going
to get me to the top and there was a lot
of restrictions there was a lot of good
foods there's a lot of bad foods and
there was kind of no middle ground and
just having gone through a lot of I
guess challenges you know as a young
adult but then coming to learn through
you know the evidence-based community
reading the sides you know getting an
education that hey things don't have to
be this black and white and there are so
many like you know options to achieving
a goal like part of my mantra and I'm
sure it's probably similar for you is
being able to now like explain to people
you know using the evidence that hey
there are this way might work for you
but you don't have to be this rigid you
don't have to stick to this structured
meal plan you can have keto you can do
intermittent fasting hey you love carbs
great let's work out a way to make this
work so I think something that I'm
really big on is working out like what
is the individual's preference like how
does your life allow you to eat like
what is your lifestyle and how can we
make the foods that you enjoy part of
that but still get the results that you
want
sorry yeah I think you know having had a
background of such rigidity knowing that
you can get on stage and still be eating
whatever it is that you want but you
know within the moderations of flexible
dining there's just so many choices
sorry I think that's something that's
really exciting for us honey I love that
and I'm gonna right relate to it
obviously as you said line from a
strength standpoint nutrition is a field
that I've always kept away from for a
lot of reasons there's a lot of
conflicting ideas
around and and that's precisely well we
wanted to have you guys on is to kind of
I don't want to say debunk because maybe
some of these diet systems work really
really well but perhaps you can simplify
it not just for our audience but also
for me I'm gonna put my hand up straight
away and say I've always kept away from
nutrition because I can just see
especially you know we're in social
media where we're all there we see the
debates going online and some of it's
completely absurd and and something that
I know that I've got a lot of confidence
in and I'm going to blow smoke your
waste Elaine I kind of know that I can
come to Lena Norton's page and just know
there's the facts over there the guy
kind of says it how it is
it's a no-bullshit approach which I
really love and this is exactly why that
we wanted to come and ask you guys these
methods now the first thing that I
thought of was I was a little bit
surprised when you said the amount of
flexibility or non rigidity with your
approach with nutrition if someone likes
keto they can do it if they like I if
they can do it I didn't think that you
you were flexible in that way what I
heard about you guys from my little
amount of knowledge on nutrition is that
you guys are advocates for IIF I am
flexible dieting is that is that am i
accurate when i say that so i think we
have to make a distinction so the reason
that I became and we became associated
with kind of a fim flexpa dieting it's
what we enjoy but we also understand
that's not appropriate for everybody so
some people aren't gonna be able to
moderate that correctly you know it's
kind of like if you give people
unlimited flexibility and they don't
have the tools to manage that they don't
know what to do they just go crazy right
but at the same time to give somebody
too much rigidity the same thing can
happen so we look at kind of on a case
per case basis and if my associational
ify am kind of came up just through mass
effect of me debunking things for myself
like looking at the data and then
talking to people about it so people
would whenever somebody makes a claim my
immediate immediate thought is oh I
wonder if that's [__]
whatever anybody makes any claim with
regards to nutrition or science or sighs
anything my first my brain first
immediately goes to I wonder if they're
full of [__] I I dig into a little bit
so for a long time like for example I
remember when I got to grad school in
2004 and one of the things we knew back
then was high fructose corn syrup makes
you fat it's gonna make you fat it's the
worst thing in the world at cetera et
cetera you know than that and I
remembered actually having a
conversation with Professor who did
research on high fructose corn syrup and
he's like well it doesn't seem to
increase fat mass independent of calorie
intake and I was like wait what no no
and this is one of the guys who's doing
the research who's getting a lot of
publicity so then I started like okay
now I go down the rabbit hole and yes
high-fructose corn syrup
associated with weight gain but it's
hard to disconnect that from calorie
intake because people who eat more high
fructose corn syrup eat more calories so
when you look at the actual like match
studies it's extremely underwhelming and
I saw that so many times where I would
go to like really tightly controlled
studies that controlled calories and
they just didn't see these single
ingredients causing all these problems
now that being said that people strawman
what I say and they'll say ladies just
say you can go out he's much high
fructose corn syrup because you want
he's a show for Pop Tarts you know he's
paid by big Coca Cola and all that kind
of stuff and that's not what I'm saying
I think it's a really bad idea to eat a
lot of refined ultra-processed foods
only because they're very calorie dense
and very easy to overeat on but if
somebody said this is what would happen
on the forums because that's where I
kind of cut my teeth was the
bodybuilding.com forums and other
bodybuilding forums before we add social
media we say well can I have a grab
pop-tart and I'll say well what are you
what's your total daily calorie intake
like oh it's you know 3,500 but yeah
like you're still getting everything
else you need in right so is that really
gonna hurt you if you have that one
thing now I mean we can't say that based
on the evidence and so people kind of
took that be like well lanes and ify I'm
guy well kinda
but everything's it's like it's very
much like a a monetary budget right so
we know how do you acquire wealth you
spend less than you make
that doesn't matter if you make a
million dollars a year you make $50,000
a year you have to spend less than you
make in order to save money I mean
nobody's gonna argue that so the same
thing comes with fat loss if you want to
lose weight you have to expend more than
you take in now there's a lot of ways
you can go about doing that but it for
if for example we've got somebody who's
you know low lean body mass sedentary
does it doesn't have much time for long
workouts and they're you know they've
got to eat thirteen fourteen hundred
calories a day to lose weight they don't
have a big budget right so is it is it a
good idea for them to have you know say
you know for Tim Tams when that's you
know 400 calories right there that's not
very filling that's kind of like
somebody who has $50,000 your income
going out and buying a really fancy
expensive sports car it's not a good
idea because it takes up so much of
their budget it makes getting in their
essentials difficult same thing in the
opposite direction if you are a macro
millionaire right if you are and
Sebastien I'm sure you know you know
guys like this who are you know big lot
of lean body mass have trouble getting
down all their calories and keeping
their weight up you know can you imagine
if you told somebody like half Thor hey
all you can eat is chicken broccoli and
rice like the dude would he would have
so much gastrointestinal distress from
so much fiber that he wouldn't be able
to eat all that right so in that way for
some people ultra-processed foods are
actually a great tool because you can
manage hunger if they have a really high
calorie but a few of them like using
those old methods you know eating very
typically clean you know low calorie
foods some of them are actually getting
to the point where they were starting to
experience you know gastrointestinal
discomfort and some strange symptoms
like nausea or vomiting and you know
after like inspecting their nutritional
intakes like some of them weren't
consuming like up in the like the upper
limits or Abbi
for some of the micronutrients and you
can end up consuming like a toxic amount
of some of these you know smaller you
know elements trace elements and things
and they can have a negative consequence
so for someone like that you absolutely
need to be encouraging you know some
more you know processed foods that are
higher and more refined so that they
don't feel sick any that's that
processed foods just like low satiating
foods yeah so so that's probably always
it just depends so I love what you just
said everything about what you just said
so basically I was kind of expecting you
to go off on a tangent and explain to us
what I ify am means which is why we
never really had this in one of the diet
fads I just thought it was gonna go
without saying but but now I would love
to know a little bit about iifym before
we go onto the rest of the different
types of diets out there can you just
explain the types of guidelines we have
as you said someone's on a really you
know low budget they're not gonna eat
for Tim Tams because they're not gonna
get all of the nutrient requirements
what what are the guidelines that you
must follow obviously it's not just like
you can eat whatever you want and get
the body that you want explain to us
simply what what are the guidelines that
you must follow to successfully follow
iifym but calling this segment breaking
down diets with bio lengths well as we
say in our book you can eat whatever you
want you just keep can't eat however
much of whatever you want right so
that's the that's the constraints I
think a lot of people use the 80/20 rule
which i think is a relatively good rule
which is you know 80% from you know
minimally processed
whole single ingredient foods in terms
of you know fruits vegetables lean meats
protein sources that kind of stuff and
then 20% of your budget you know go have
fun with but again you know I don't want
people to hear that and get too rigid
with that because again you could ask
somebody out there who you know if
they're eating for 1405 or 4500 calories
per day they're trying to gain weight
even 20% might be too low to have fun
with because they're just gonna have
struggle to get in all those calories
now by the same token if somebody's down
to 1400 calories 20% may not make sense
it may need to be almost 100% minimally
processed foods just because they'll
have
trouble keeping themselves say ciated if
they're you know having you know very
much our ultra-processed calorie dense
foods generally below your calorie
intake sand again sorry we have set
range of calories that are kind of
deemed to be optimal or normal then we
have people that are consuming a lower
amount of calories or then we call them
Akron aiders people that seem to be able
to consume a lot higher calories and
still maintain their body weight so the
lower you are on that spectrum
I guess the greater the percentage of
calories that really need to be coming
from Whole Foods just to ensure that
you're meeting your bodies you know a
daily micronutrient requirements and
then I guess the higher up you kind of
move through that that spectrum the more
freedom you have to be able to start
including more of those you know found
you know high calorie foods sorry
flexible dieting was something I came
across because what I tended to see and
this was when I first started coaching
back in 2005 I know it seems crazy that
we had online coaches before Instagram
but you know when I first started
coaching back in 2005 and I worked with
primarily for the first five six years
of my career 90% of my clientele was
either people who competed in drug-free
bodybuilding or people who had goals to
compete drug-free bodybuilding
after that I started working with more
gen pop and also worked with some IFBB
people as well but for the most part
what I observed was it was really
interesting was that if the more
restrictive they were during their diet
the it seemed like the more rapidly they
would put weight back on after their
contest prep was over and what I found
was the people who I allowed to have a
little bit more flexibility or who had a
more flexible mindset with hey I can
have this thing it's it's not that bad
I'm just gonna track it than my calories
and protein carbs and fats and move on
with my life you know they seem to do
really well whereas people who were like
I'm only sticking to these foods or this
meal plan what I would find is they
would do great with that for you know a
few days or a few weeks and then they
would have one day where they just went
the off the rails it was almost like you
know the idea is like getting instead of
instead of like getting a flat tire just
changing the tire they got a flat tire
then slashed all three their other time
I think that's that's actually there's a
clinical name for that it's called a
disinhibition reflex and if you think
about it from a psychological
perspective if you put somebody in a
room and you say you can go any put
somebody house you say you can go
anywhere in this house you want but
there's one door you like but for the
love of God don't go in there if you go
in there all God help you
so what immediately what do you want to
do yeah so it's funny that we have kind
of this black-and-white thinking so by
me saying you know it's okay to have
this some people think I'm gonna make
them eat that and that's not true what I
always say is you know a coach should
never tell you exactly what you should
be eating unless we're talking about
some kind of clinical diagnosis they
should provide guidelines and structured
flexibility so that inherently you know
how to make good choices but you also
know how to handle it when you make
not-so-good choices and you don't go off
the rails the tools of the knowledge to
actually make an adjustment on their own
like you're not really enabling them to
grow it's like what's the saying about
you know you can you can give a person a
fish in the lake for a day you teach him
to fish and I won't live for a year
totally relate to that when I came to
you guys I was gluten-free dairy-free
refined sugar-free and I was I remember
saying to you Lane you're even who you
Holly gave me prescribed in his diet
like I don't want to even know that [__]
yes I do not want any of that that that
is just not for me but it took me so
long to wrap my head around how you guys
prescribe to these diets I just could
not get it I could not grasp it I was
like what do you mean I can eat this
it's only like in the last couple of
years that I've gone you know art this
makes sense yeah so who
so what we talk about is it really sexy
it's not like soundbite worthy you know
it just it go it's kind of like I'll
make another monetary comparison you
know so telling people you know save
your money
you know live within your means invest
wisely
you know don't don't know do crazy
things that that doesn't really grab
headlines yeah what pops up on your feet
all the time is three steps to make six
figures from home without even working
you know that kind of stuff that's the
stuff that gets that gets a lot of
attention and badly you know that's so
people start because that's what gets
attention that's what people start
believing and I think people I think the
one other thing we're missing is that
people like to feel self-righteous about
what they're doing and they want to feel
validated about what they're doing right
know for example if you're on a very
restrictive diet and you're suffering
right because it just sucks you want to
feel like that suffering is worth it
so you know I and I've done this when I
was younger like I would be out
somewhere you know having my chicken
that I brought with me or whatever
looking at other people eating on a
restaurant and I'd be like ah [__]
lazy you know whatever but that was that
was it true me trying to justify it in
my mind as to what I was doing for I
think a lot of people they find what
they like and then they retro actively
try to find the science to justify what
they're doing when in reality saying hey
I like this and it's my preference is a
perfectly reasonable reason to do
something that way so for example I like
a little bit of calorie cycling so on
days I have harder training sessions I
like to consume more calories you won't
find any scientific research that
suggests that's how you should do things
in fact most the scientific research
suggests that it doesn't it doesn't
really matter as long as your weekly
calories are equated but I like that so
I do it but when I tell other people
about it I will say hey there doesn't
seem to be any research behind this but
I like it maybe you will maybe you won't
it's a tool in the tool belt but I don't
try to sell to something it's not and I
think that's really hard for
people right it's it's a great approach
definitely everything that you're
talking about sounds very obviously
macronutrient oriented do you have any
guidelines with micronutrients when it
comes to iifym style of dieting I'm sure
some of you and maybe your listeners are
familiar was the reverse diet you know
concept of restoring your metabolism and
being able to increase your calories so
again depending on where you fall on
that trajectory of you know being
someone that is you know their
maintenance calories are very low versus
somebody that you know has been able to
work through a reverse diet or it's just
never died within their life so they you
know naturally got this high in dodges
metabolic rate you know the higher up
you are on that spectrum I think the
more likely you're going to have a good
micronutrient intake anyway just via
pure volume of food alone you know
you're eating a lot of food you're going
to be getting a lot of micronutrients as
it is so again I think depending on
where you are on that spectrum you need
to pay more attention to you know how
many whole foods you're actually
consuming thinking about the the breath
of you know the food groups trying to
make sure that you're including
everything is all of them as possible
you know rotating through from week to
week to make sure that you've got all
the micronutrients but yeah like I said
I think the lower end of the spectrum we
need to pay more closely attention to
the types of foods that you're consuming
as you move through they have a little
bit more flexibility to kind of expand
there was actually a study that examined
this I think about a year or two ago and
they looked at people who followed kind
of a flexible eating pattern versus
people who were on a set meal plan and
what they actually found was really
interesting so I mean the meal plan was
kind of clean eating they actually found
that people who were on a flexible I
don't recall flexible dieting cuz what
exactly it's like school dieting but
people who had a flexible approach had
better distribution of micronutrients
than people who were on a kind of clean
eating plan and it it makes sense from
the perspective of if you're only eating
certain foods you're probably going to
be really high in some micronutrients
but possibly frank deficient and others
and they actually I think they found
that I think it was vitamin E there are
actually people who own the kind of the
clean eating plan were like low in
vitamin E and a couple
they were like borderland a couple of
others so that being said you know
however you like to eat if you're
worried about it you can take a
multivitamin then you don't have to
worry about any more in your your cover
you know those vitamins sorry I don't
there's multivitamins what I mean you've
got some that are first off a lot of
supplements end up being bulk out there
if you actually test them so that's
that's one qualifier that you have to
worry about right the natural form like
after all that's why capsule form so
when it comes to its actual availability
how much of that is actually being
absorbed across the intestinal lumen
actually you know being dispersed
throughout the body it's not going to be
as good as if you can eat something
that's a whole food is a better chance
for that to be actually digested as I'll
see to yeah so you've kind of touched on
the next I guess diet style which is
clean eating and we want to go through a
whole bunch of these but perhaps you can
give us a small definition the way that
you define the pros and the cons of
plain eating so I think my first problem
with clean eating is there is no
objective definition of what constitutes
a clean food that was that was one of
the first things I really I really had a
problem with again my brain goes I
wonder if that's [__] that's one of
those things where it's like okay well
why you know what makes a food clean
because you know vegetarians or vegans
will tell you that meat isn't clean and
then media or you know carnivores would
tell you that you know plants aren't
clean because of God whatever reason
they come up with so it kind of depends
on the group but the the what you know
typical the clean eating I grew up with
was kind of the body building stock
clean eating right but even then there
was debate about well you can't have
dairy or can you have dairy or can you
have fruits you know because they've got
fructose that sort of thing and I just
find it very interesting like one of the
foods I used to break down clean eating
is I actually talked about like like air
popped popcorn right so somebody do you
think it's sleep potato is clean oh yeah
yeah yeah I talked these body butters
yeah okay what do you think air pop
popcorn
is clean oh no it's not clean so okay
well how does that work because explain
your logic to me because the sweet
potato is more calorie dense in terms of
volumetric slike if you look at a bowl
of popcorn there's actually very little
calories in it per Bowl but I know a
sweet potato you go through like two or
three hundred calories like in a in a
couple minutes you know like it's not
difficult to get through and you know a
popcorn has more protein and more fiber
per serving than a sweet potato so
please explain to me how lean but
popcorn isn't and then they kind of say
something about Michael the storm off so
that was my first proper clean eating as
there is no there is no objective
definition of it I don't have a problem
with somebody who wants to you know if
you want to call it like minimally
processed you know kind of whole food
single ingredient foods fine so you know
my thing was okay you can eat that way
but you don't have to eat that way to
make progress now there's one caveat to
that do I think the general guidelines
of clean eating are probably pretty good
guidelines for most people which is
minimally processed you know low calorie
density high protein you know well you
know high micronutrient you know like
nutrient-dense foods yeah I think that's
pretty good guidelines for most people
the problem becomes as would be you
become a rigid to that right so that's
like saying you know a reduced
carbohydrate diet can help with fat loss
absolutely that's a and people who say
well I prefer to eat this way that's a
completely reasonable reason to do it
I've got no problem with that but where
the problem comes in is when they start
trying to do [__] with the science
and say well insulins the cause of why
everybody's fat and sugar is addictive
and this kind of stuff and there's just
no evidence for that that just you know
you don't but again it comes down to you
don't need to justify it if you like to
eat a sir
a-and it's sustainable and you can
adhere to it that's a completely
reasonable reason to eat that way just
don't try to like do mental gymnastics
to get you know people to think that
your diet is superior yeah I think so I
guess if you know that you are somebody
that really struggles with you know
setting limits on those types of you
know highly processed foods or highly
palpable palatable foods it's probably
not a good idea if you are that person
to consume a lot of those I'll have them
you know prevalent in your diet because
then there is a greater risk aggressive
you know overconsumption excess calories
leading to obesity but for others some
people can very easily have a handful of
you know some candy or some chocolate
and then they can say no that's enough
sorry I think the people that kind of
get into this mindset of whole you know
sugar is addictive or you know it's it's
the cause of obesity well yes it is a
very palatable food but generally what
we tend to see is you know the foods
that are most palatable are just high in
sugar they're also really high in fats -
it's like you don't normally have one
without the other so you know they do
that where do they both get a fair
treatment probably not I think generally
sugar gets a bit of a bad rap but not
everybody has that same I guess response
to eating those types of foods and one
other thing I was actually reading a
paper yesterday and I don't like to read
the article it's about sodium
sorry I think that's something else that
kind of gets asked about you know with
processed foods or frozen foods you know
is it the sodium really high the actual
number of people that are salt sensitive
is very low it's probably about five
percent of the population so generally
speaking like the amount of sodium in
your diet probably isn't as much of a
bigger deal as we once thought sorry
um yeah what I was reading though was
there are there do seem to be some
studies now that are linking high sodium
foods we've generally increased hunger
or appetite so while it's not directly
the cause or potentially a cause of you
know weight gain or obesity perhaps it
is a correlation in the
it helps you to or it's causing you to
be more hungry
thus we overeat and then that leads to
the fat guy and so it's not like a
direct link well you know again how they
processed foods it's usually high in
carbohydrate particularly sugar high in
fat and high in sodium and that kind of
combination I mean think about the a
perfect example of that is a baked
potato okay take a baked potato
how palatable is it without butter and
without salt but you add butter and salt
to it and all the sudden is pretty damn
palatable right but people think about
the potato right same thing with like
it's interesting when I see people going
after sugar and they'll say why I just
can't handle you know sugar I'm addicted
to sugar and they're talking about
eating donuts and cookies and cakes and
whatnot those now those foods do have
for some people there is some evidence
they have addictive like qualities but
you're not how much sugar in fact for
most those foods more there's more
calories coming from fat than there is
sugar so it's just interesting how
that's kind of become the the bad guy in
nutrition and when in reality it's kind
of the confluence of several different
factors that makes a food kind of hyper
palatable or not sorry it's it's super
interesting like I think a lot of people
will resort to food as a means of coping
with stress or anxiety or you know some
kind of problem that's going on in their
life and I'm definitely culprit and do
to you that I'm but I've had to start
kind of unlearning how I do things
because it's become a you know it's
habit it's something that we've done if
the behavior is going on for such a long
time now it's a habit but what we tend
to do is like when you eat you're still
getting the exact same kind of feeling
that you would for as a comparison like
somebody that you know uses or results
to like drug taking they're getting that
like dopamine release the you know that
feel-good feeling so when you eat you're
getting a really similar response
particularly in relation to these you
know highly palatable foods so if you
are stressed or you have some kind of
anxiety how do the brain oh we've got
the prefrontal cortex and we have the a
Magpul ah so one of those is
sponsible for like our logic our
reasoning you know all the things that
makes sense and then one is like the
hindbrain it's a lizard brain that's the
amygdala so you're feeling really
stressed and something is going on if
the first thing that your body's gonna
do it's the way that we're wired from an
evolutionary standpoint you are then
going to switch to something called
doing an action or a task that makes you
feel good so a lot of people go to those
foods because they have that same
feeling so it's it's also like trying to
retrain your brain to not immediately
you know divert to those foods and find
other things that you can do instead of
going down this pathway and you know
abusing food people gambling some people
like sex addiction some people it's
drugs whatever there's ways to rewire
that temp positive stuff you know like
you know for me I know that I can handle
most stress in my life whenever I'm able
to train hard you know if I can train
art I can handle most anything you've
seen it you know like the worst I've
ever been like I could have like stuff
going on we're like oh [__] that's what
a stressful but if I going in squat
heavy and I'm like oh man I just feel
like I can handle some more stuff you
know what I mean so I think you can some
of that stuff but it's a lot of work
change is hard yeah it's in it's in it's
important people try they want to
isolate you know nutrition now to one
variable or you know the one thing or I
had somebody say you know don't you
think it's just social economic that
you're people who don't have money you
know they can't buy these good foods and
I said well this probably contributes to
it but you're talking about you know I
really wish people would stop being so
reductionist and let's just accept that
this is a multi-faceted problem that
probably doesn't have a simple solution
and it's gonna take a multi-faceted
solution that is kind of comprehensive
in order to you know help combat the
obesity crisis I think the sooner that
people kind of accept that the sooner we
can you know understand what is actually
going to help you know get people better
Wow you've brought up so many great
points there and a lot of them we want
to actually get to covered flexible died
to have covered clean eating kind of
touched on or sugar-free gluten-free
can we just cover paleo the Paleo diet I
guess it was kind of brought to the
attention
by I guess the CrossFit is certainly
when I started hearing about it probably
about you know like like 2008 maybe I
think so essentially it's just the
removal of grains and dairy from from
the diet sorry
it's basically what you're left with is
protein fruits and vegetables handful of
nuts and seeds and a lot of people ended
up getting really obese or overplaying
from this because all the sudden like
remove foods from their diet that they
really once enjoyed and now they're
replacing that because they're still
getting hungry and my auntie is a
perfect example of this she started the
Paleo diet and she you know text me one
dose like I'm starting this and I'm like
oh this would be interesting I wouldn't
care so I think she put on like 10 kilos
over the space of 6 months following
this Coulier diet you know a trainer had
instructed here you may have got to do
this all you can eat all these you know
foods that but you can eat is a bunch of
avocado that's great for you use your
macadamia oils why don't you try trail
mix Trail Mix is great so you know all
she's done is just adding a bunch of
more calories through these calorie
dense things and really they're not very
satisfying because they're so low in
protein in their sole own dietary fiber
so yeah that's my little story about
paleo but I think that's one of those
things where you know if you talk about
the principles of what paleo recommends
I don't think it's necessarily bad
advice right so it's high protein lean
meats you know some nuts legumes you
know that sort of thing
but in an attempt to validate what they
believe to be true right again instead
of just saying I like eating this way
it's a high satiating diet they say we
gotta eat like you know caveman did
because that's how we of all sorry sir
you be quiet
you know and again and it's kind of
doing [__] with the scientific and
religious sure I mean just take dairy
for example they say don't eat dairy cuz
cavemen didn't eat dairy I'm not sure
how they know that but ok
apparently and which actually by the way
there is some evidence that we we did
domesticate cows even like you know ten
twenty thousand years ago and we're
using dairy but that's another point
entirely paleo is very specific by the
way to where in the region of Earth you
are from right and we just need to look
at I'm gonna tangent for a second then
draw it back but did you guys watch the
game changers they make a big point
about the burial site and that the
gladiators they found their what a
plant-based diet and it kind of used
that see see this must be best for
performance know what they don't talk
about is the one of the other study
authors who mentioned that the reason he
thought they had that meat a lot of
grains was to fatten them up because
having a layer of fat was actually
beneficial for cut wounds and for their
competition but what you find is that in
that area yes that was a landlocked area
they had a higher plant-based food or
plant-based intake but if you look at
areas that were close to the sea they
had high seafood intake you so what does
that tell us they weren't doing it for
performance-enhancing busy but they were
just using the fuels that were available
to them that were affordable so if we
circle back
oh why would we why cut out dairy I mean
every I mean again if you have a lactose
intolerance if you have some sort of
intolerance that's that's that's one
thing you know use lactose free or don't
eat it but every study we have on Demery
I mean it's pretty conservative
meta-analysis that just came out that
basically showed that people who eat
more dairy tend to have more lean body
mass more bone mineral density and seem
to be a little bit healthier overall so
you know again and actually there was
there was they started some trials on
calcium because they found people who
ate more dairy actually were lower in
body fat than people who did so again
it's it's kind of like okay the general
principles are fine but then when you
become dogmatic about it and you say
well we have to eat like cavemen then it
then it's kind of like well you've
jumped the shark here you're you're
you're way off base with this and you're
sending the wrong message again
if it's just this may if it's pitched as
this is a method of eating that is
highly satiating and it may help you
limit your food intake and it's
nutrient-dense cool but when the message
is well we can't eat these foods because
our answers to do I always tell people I
don't give a [__] what our ancestors ate
our ancestors lived to about 40 and they
weren't trying to push the limits of
human performance so just because they
you know like it just it doesn't make
any sense whatsoever it's kind of who I
always say every different diet group
claims that you know the Paleolithic
area grew up on their diet vegans
they'll tell you that humans weren't
meant to eat meat ketogenic people will
tell you didn't we we didn't need carbs
and paleo people tell you we didn't
drink milk so III tell them I don't
really give a [__] about any of them I
just I care about what does the data say
right now you know drawing it back to
market at you in take and how your body
will function in an optimal setting like
once you're taking something away you
know now you're potentially risking you
know micronutrient deficiencies and
you're putting your body in a position
where it's not going to be functioning
at its best
yeah okay next one Kido Kido a ketogenic
diet has been around actually since the
1800s people want to make this to be
like it's some new diet but it's been
around for a long time and actually
there is some really good evidence for
the ketogenic diet being a therapeutic
option for people with epilepsy so
epilepsy seems to be a situation where
ATP I think it's ATP manufacturing the
brain is impaired due to some kind of
glucose resistance yeah I could be my if
keto experts hear this and I messed this
up feel free to correct me but so by
providing ketones as a alternative
substrate to glucose the brain is able
to function and it's actually been
showed to limit seizures deep-sea divers
they the Navy has been looking at this
also this whole like my friend dog
D'Agostino who's one of the main
researchers for the ketogenic diet
he started out because he was looking at
hyperbaric oxygen therapy for deep-sea
divers but actually found that
people who were on a ketogenic diet got
less seizures at depth than people who
weren't so there are some therapeutic
options for it as far as cancer goes
there's the glucose softest glucose
obligate tumors the ketogenic diet might
help with that there is some new
evidence that suggests some tumors in
particular actually prefer ketones to
glucose so it seems to be very tumor
type specific but I'm an oncologist not
a cancer expert but there are some
research going on with you know maybe an
adjunct therapy for cancer so there are
so there are some interesting things out
there as far as how it works is
basically if you severely limit your
carbohydrate intake and we're talking
you know minimum you got to be under
hundred grams a day for most people
under 50 and also the ketogenic diet
it's not a super high protein diet not a
normal traditional ketogenic diet people
think it's a high protein high fat diet
it's actually a moderate protein very
low carbohydrate very high fat diet and
what happens essentially is that if you
are on a biochemical level if you're not
eating carbohydrate in the cell you have
what's called the Krebs cycle which is
where you produce substrates for
obstinate phosphorylation which is how
your body makes ATP in the Krebs cycle
if you're not eating enough carbohydrate
what's going to happen is one of those
intermediates called oxaloacetate
doesn't get regenerated for the Krebs
cycle and you start having an
accumulation of acetyl co a and acetyl
co a can be taken and converted by the
liver to ketones and so those ketones
can serve as alternate fuels that the
mitochondria in the cell can use for for
oxidation and to produce ATP so if you
take somebody and you put them on a low
carbohydrate diet or you fast them what
you'll see is they'll primarily use
glucose or you know whatever is
available fuels around four pi about 12
to 18
hours and then once that runs out you'll
see their blood ketone levels start to
go up and though usually max out I think
it's like 2/3 millimolar is kind of what
you get to the maximum on a ketogenic
diet most of your fuel is fatty acids
and ketones you're not using a whole lot
of glucose and that's also ketones and
fats are glucose sparing because your
muscle still tries to so people have
this idea that when you on a ketogenic
diet it completely depletes muscle
glycogen that's actually not true you
most of my kitchen stores only fall
about they fall 40% initially but then
go back up to about 25-30 percent and
that's a survival thing because think
about it you you can't use ketones for
high-intensity exercise and you can't
use fast for high-intensity exercise so
go back you know 10,000 years lion
starts chasing you you haven't had
access to carbohydrates you would want
those ketones and fats to be able to
spare the carbohydrates so the
carbohydrates you do get in or that your
liver makes cuz your liver can make
about 120 grams of carbohydrate a day
with zero glucose intake you want those
carbohydrates you did have in your body
to be stored at least some as muscle
glycogen so that if you needed it as a
last-ditch effort to get the [__] out of
somewhere you could right so that's kind
of the biochemical aspects of it as far
as you know it's a fat loss diet some
people find the ketogenic diet very
satiating ketones do seem to have an
appetite inhibitory effect but in terms
of calorie per calorie on weight loss
there's been several really well
controlled studies and what I mean
control I mean like metabolic ward I
think people don't fully appreciate what
a metabolic ward study is this is where
they house people basically in food Jail
you're provided every single meal they
everything's weighed out measured they
know exactly what you're eating you
cannot get food anywhere you're they and
the reason these are only like four
weeks long so they got to pay these
people a lot of money
at this place Wow so when they've done
straight-up trials comparing like even
like extreme high-carb like over 300
grams of carbs per day versus
under-filled
like 30 grams per day calories and
protein equated they don't see much
difference in fat loss in fact the the
fat low fat diet was actually a little
bit better in countless will actually
get a more aggressive weight drop in the
beginning and that's just due to the
reduction in carbohydrates obviously
when you think about carbohydrates
moving into the muscle cells you've also
got an accompanying amount of fluid
that's going to move into that
interstitial space so when you take out
the carbohydrate not only are you
reducing your stored muscle blockage and
you've also got removal of water so I
think people that generally what you'll
see they have to do a washout period I'm
in these studies to make sure that
they're actually matching them to fit at
because otherwise you will see in the
beginning stages of those you know
dietary interventions the Peter Jenny
group will have a greater more
accelerated weight loss and then from on
the front end yeah that's a great point
that's what they found in Kevin Hall's
NIH studies was they found a greater
weight loss but actually a little bit
more fat loss than a low-fat diet diet
it wasn't much it was like a few grant
it was like 20 grams extra per day but
there was actually a recent study that
was done by the same group again
completely inpatient inpatient rather
this time they didn't match calories
they just said hey we're gonna give one
group of ketogenic diet another group a
kind of like high carbohydrate
plant-based high-fiber diet and you guys
eat as much as you want and let's just
see how much each group eats now what's
interesting is both groups decrease
their food intake they both lost weight
but the plant-based like low-fat
high-fiber diet dropped their calories
by like I think they dropped their
calories by like almost 600 more
spontaneously than the ketogenic diet
group so what what that says is that yes
the ketogenic diet for some people helps
with their appetite but it doesn't also
seem to be superior to you know a
high-fiber diet in general so what it
boils down to is what do you prefer if
you like eating that way
it can certainly work but I think for
most people the ketogenic diet probably
isn't the best tool simply because most
people are like can you sustain that are
you gonna just give up carbohydrates for
the rest of your life I mean for most
people the answer's no yeah that's what
I was just thinking there was something
I was reading the other day they were
actually looking at the I guess rates of
underreporting or the reduction in
people's dietary intakes when they are
being assessed and it was something like
15% reduction in calories when people
are told you can eat whatever you want
but they know that they're being
observed
it is about a 15% label it was a
systematic review I'm looking at these
different types of studies and they
found 15% underreporting so that's kind
of like wishing that with clients - so
like like we'll say we don't want you to
change anything we just want to get an
idea of what you're eating just track it
for a week and what happens is like okay
here's what I'm eating by the way I lost
four pounds this week yeah and it's like
wait so you just told me that you
weren't able to lose weight and all we
did was have you track and boom all said
you started dropping so it's interesting
I actually want to ask you about
tracking but yeah something like when
you're mentioning all of this and with
all the diets so so many of them don't
seem sustainable is there one in
particular that you find works bit like
obviously flexible dieting because
you've spoken about that and that's what
you guys like but is there any others
that you think are more sustainable
I think it just depends on the
individual and their individual
psychology I've really become a big fan
of you know don't bias it by what you
prefer talk to the individual some
people like time restricted eating I
[__] hate intermittent fasting
intermittent fasting is basically where
you restrict your feeding window so you
you the most popular form is 16-8 so
people fast for 16 hours they eat over
an 8 hour period you've also got some
people who do 20 to cerb they do 18 6
and then you got 24 and you've got 22 2
or whatever all different sorts of ways
there's a lot of studies looking at it
and for the most part what they show is
it's basically a tool to reduce your
calorie intake they there doesn't seem
to be a metabolic advantage people want
to talk about spikes your growth hormone
it doesn't seem to make it growth
hormones
in the physiological bit range makes
absolutely zero difference in fat loss
and muscle gain but again it's it's kind
of some people prefer to eat that way
and so then they try to find the science
to justify their meeting that way when
in reality should just say I like eating
this way my wife eats this way she
doesn't eat before noon I usually yeah
doing one right mixers I guess I won't
I generally train in the morning I like
to get that done and dusted so I can go
focus on work and not have anything else
to distract me so yeah it's not
something that I've always done I kind
of just gravitated towards that I think
over the years of try trial and error
with so many different nutrition
strategies just to see what works and I
think that's something we encourage our
clients to do it over time you know find
something or an approach that works for
you yeah so just just Sebastian I don't
know about you but I come from that
old-school bodybuilding power thing
where it's like you should be as full as
you possibly can when you go into the
gym if you're not [__] your braids
out while you're squatting something's
wrong and you should be bloated you
should be bloated as hell that produces
a good training session you know that's
but you know I tell people I'm like
that's the way I like to do it I like to
feel fueled up but I don't have any
evidence and it's better I just know I
like doing it that way I think you're
right with that lane everything that I
hear about with all of these different
types of diets really refer to fat loss
and that's a that's kind of like really
outside of what I do everything that I'm
about is okay calorie surplus and eating
more food and fueling your body for
performance so I absolutely respect that
there's a huge audience for fat loss and
that's what a lot of these different
plans are relating to is fat loss what
about the flip side of that our next
style of diet that I want to ask you
about is a fodmap diet and the reason
why I'm bringing up fodmap diet is I
relate that to a vertical diet I'm sure
you've heard all about that and that's
something that I'll loosely follow
that's you know working with
half-thought that's that's his he works
with then and he follows a vertical diet
and I find when I'm eating with him I'm
able to eat a lot of food I've sat with
him and I've counted an eight eight
thousand calorie day with him and
was able to actually do that and do it
quite comfortably up until the end of
the day I had a glass of milk and then
all of a sudden everything went milk
yeah it was the milk that was the only
thing that my gut says they couldn't
finish this much left of the milk it was
hilarious it's on YouTube for anyone who
wants to check it out but Sam what what
do you think of when people ask me about
verticals I say I know from a calorie
surplus standpoint or a muscle building
standpoint I think it works really
really well for me obviously half one
half was 450 pounds
and it's not an easy task so it's like
it really works for us yeah what what
are your thoughts on on vertical diet
yeah so just I have people you know
tagged me and stand stuff and then I
call destroy this so I'm like I'm not
gonna destroy it like San Stan doesn't
make claims about it for like being
superior for fat loss or anything you
know that's and that's the thing people
get so dogmatic about diets as they see
stand talking about it and I think he's
saying oh this is the best diet for
everybody you know and he's not making
those claims in the population he's
working with which is you know the
strong men guys with a lot of muscle
mass not I've I try to explain this
people I'm like I remembered seeing ben
pakulski and Brian Shaw standing next to
each other and I was like oh my god Ben
looks like he could fit this pocket and
Ben's too like 290 pounds you know what
he's like and I'm just like he looks
tiny next to him and I want to get
anywhere near there just a little a twig
oh yeah the amount of food these guys
have to eat to maintain that I mean I
know Ray Williams for example us APL
champion IBF champion raised about 400
pounds and Ray says you know if he has a
couple of days where he's just kind of
not like really trying to force food
down he'll lose 10 20 pounds you know
and so for those guys it's not about
trying to be satiated it's about how can
we minimize gastrointestinal discomfort
for these guys because a lot of these
guys
are going to feel so bloated and
lethargic all the time from all the food
they're eating how can we get them to
eat a bunch of calories without feeling
so bad and now I'm gonna let our fodmap
expert take this one with my background
in gastroenterology is a really big you
know window of what we're learning about
so I guess the fodmap diet or the
elimination diet the vertical diet
whatever you want to call it essentially
it's an acronym it stands for
fructooligosaccharides and polyol so
these are certain molecules that are in
food that are known to kind of be
irritants for some people but typically
people with a more sensitive GI so
there's a huge list of foods that kind
of fall within this category and you
know for some foods within like one of
those unique groups it might be that a
50 gram serving of that food is a low
fodmap go for it go to town and you can
have that amount and it's not going to
do anything but if you have a hundred
grand serve of that food it's now a high
five map so it is really individual to
how people will respond to each of these
foods and some people will be sensitive
to one and not another so I guess the
first thing for most people if they are
somebody that feels like they've got a
little bit of a gastrointestinal you
know discomfort whether it's bloating
wind pain visible like farting or
whatever you know diarrhea constipation
like all of that falls in within the IBS
category irritable bowel syndrome sorry
I guess the first thing that you can do
is actually have a test that can help
you determine which of these formats why
does one FODMAPs
pain causes okay so why are they so
essentially all of these foods ended up
traveling through the GI tract largely
undigested so once they reach the large
colon what happens is the natural gut
microflora or the microbiome that exists
there
they tend to use that food as like their
energy source so due to the process of
fermentation through the microbiome they
end up producing compounds called short
chain short chain fatty-acids and they
also produce hydrogen and that is like
the gas so you might notice if you have
a really high fiber diet just generally
you may end up being a little bit more
gassy on that day because a greater
percentage of the food volume that
you've consumed is gonna make it to your
colon and it's gonna get fermented sorry
you know something else I guess that
people don't think about and it's
probably a story for another day but is
you know if you have a high-fiber diet
or you start to introduce more
high-fiber foods through a diet phase
you can actually end up retaining more
of the calories from those just through
the fact that the the gut microbiome
will end up developing to cater to the
foods that it's being provided with so
then over time you end up getting a
greater reabsorption of those short
chain fatty acids back across the
intestinal lumen you get more energy
back sorry
that's something that we kind of talk
about I guess you know if you give your
weight loss stalls or plateaus but back
to fodmap so hydrogen breath-testing is
something that you can do to actually
assess other Turman you know if you have
any tolerance to any of those acronyms
essentially you have to make sure that
you're eating a lot of those foods you
go in they give you a beverage or a
solution that contains a really high
amount for example it'll be like the
equivalent of if you were testing for
lactose intolerance you'd be having like
what's equivalent in a small solution of
a liter of milk so you know based on the
amount of hydrogen gas that you produce
and they collect can kind of then give
you a diagnosis of whether you're
sensitive to that to that food so it's a
really quick and easy way to get a
pretty quick diagnosis and you simply
eliminate that particular food or that
group of foods completely and then over
time you slowly Reath reintroduce some
of those to determine what your
threshold is because again a small
amount might be totally fine you can get
away with having 50 grams of Brussels
or you know 50 grams of cauliflower but
if you have a hundred then you know
you're stinking out the entire bedroom
forget about it sorry
those individually or can they do the
tests dietitian so a local dietician
that specializes in gastro I mean food
intolerance should be able to organize
that test and you can go in and have the
plethora of tests done sorry you do them
over series of days you couldn't do them
all in the one day yeah yeah you test
for those individually right worrying
that back for you Sebastian to kind of
the strongman stuff so for example right
now I'm plenty I was at I was the 93
kilo
lifter I went up to the 105 kilo class
last year just I was Rebeck are you
having my back injury I didn't want to
worry about being restricted to get to
105 for me by the end so when I'm here
93 I don't have any GI discomfort like I
can eat all kinds of different FODMAPs
and it doesn't bother me
but I found that when I got to 4,000
calories a day all of a sudden I get to
the end of the day and I would just not
feel like eating so I think a lot of
people probably have these sensitivities
but either their calories are low enough
or they don't eat enough of these foods
to really have problems but when you
start to get two guys who are eating you
know six seven eight thousand calories a
day even if even if on a per calorie
level your diets pretty low in FODMAPs
you can accumulate quite a bit
throughout the course of the day and so
I think you know again some of the some
of the guys have said well I feel so
much better
some of them actually initially lose
weight because they're not so bloated
all the time people mistake that for oh
I lost fat I got leaner that sort of
thing but in reality doing these
elimination-style diets is just freeing
their diet from gut irritants and it's
making them feel a lot better and
they're able to perform a little bit
better so I think that's again that's
why it's all tool to the tool belt you
know if somebody is trying to get as
lean as possible you know the feeling of
being bloated is actually good for
getting lean because it stops you from
eating but if you're trying to pack away
8000 calories it's a pretty terrible
thing to have because now it's limiting
you from being able to
get that many calories in so you can
deadlift an absurd 500 1q on that just
the idea of feeling bloated I've always
associated that with a really not a nice
thing is this something that you're kind
of aiming towards when you're when
you're putting someone on a fat log
towards a fat loss goal is that an okay
thing to feel bloated yeah I think it
depends on the individual
some people like they get that feeling
of bloated especially females and it
discourages them and they get you know
but but some people like our friend
Pauline or Dean she's a trainer out in
LA and she like prides herself on the
veggie bloat she talks about eating you
know like two pounds of broccoli and a
meal and just she's like hey I promise
you she's like if you'll eat two pounds
of broccoli you don't want to eat me
more she's like so go do that no it's I
would like it but I remember when I was
getting ready for show just you know my
calories got down to around 20 100 mm
you know for me that's a pretty low
amount of calories and I was eating a
lot of mushrooms actually so mushrooms
are very satiating and I would eat like
literally a pound of mushrooms with some
meat as well and like I would be so
bloated after than that but it would
make me feel full and so I wouldn't need
any more calories so it was good from a
satiety standpoint so I think it can be
a useful tool the other thing is you
hear a lot of as people go why feel
bloated all the time my GI isn't healthy
she is probably really healthy the fact
that you are bloated because that means
your gut bacteria are just having a
party down there cuz you're given of all
kinds of fuel so people kind of mistake
this you know discomfort for I'm not
healthy now there can be times when
you're not healthy and you are bloated
that's true but just because you're
bloated doesn't mean your GI is
unhealthy and I've had to explain that
to a lot of clients but sure yeah sure
it can be a fuel and that again going
back to kind of elimination diet or even
like the carnivore diet which is very
popular now a lot of people who start
the carnivore died they say well I lost
weight well you're eating meat which is
hard to overeat on and secondly you're
not eating any fiber so if you have
you are somebody who has a high degree
of gut irritation you've essentially
just done an elimination diet and you've
cut the gut irritants out and all of a
sudden you feel better it's not that you
know meat heels or that you know meat is
magic
and you just cut these gut irritants out
and you feel better so again it's that's
why we say everything's tools in a tool
belt because as you can see depending on
one person like a hat for right you want
to want to give him the same style of
programming or even and I'm sure like
even with training right you're not
going to program for him the same way
you program for a 66 kilo IPF lifter
right like those smaller guys can handle
a lot more volume you take somebody
who's that big who can deadlift 500
kilos and you try having the deadlift
super heavy you know three to three
times a week it beats the crap out of
them because they're just overall more
tonnage so it's the same thing with
nutrition has to be programmed has to be
targeted that's been on the individual
their preferences and also what they can
adhere to and their goals and that's why
again we don't get dogmatic about any
one thing because we've seen every which
way work yeah of course so well while
we're on the topic of athletes and
eating for performance and you know
looking at the big guys like this who
like I feed this guy so I know that I'm
cooking quite a few meals and quite a
few meat meals per day just talking
about protein consumption and high
protein consumption I guess that will
lead us on to the next diet which would
be the carnivore diet but um you know is
it healthy what's too much protein when
should we be eating protein pre-workout
post-workout let's talk about that a
little bit but I can support the
carnivore diet isn't so much the protein
intake you know protein intake of even
up to 4.4 grams per kilogram of lean
body mass has been studied dr. Jose
Antonio did a study where I think he
looked at people for a year who were
consuming habitually 4.4 grams per kilo
of lean body mass that's a very high
protein intake and they didn't seem to
see any negative health outcomes so I
I'm not really concerned about it from
that aspect my concern be more what
you're eliminating Tribute so the fact
that you know you're only eating meat
well right away no fiber right and I had
this actually had a debate with two
carnivore people Paul Saladino as well
as
Sean Baker you know their point was well
you don't really need fiber you know if
I don't need fiber nothing bad happens
well if you look at the systematic
reviews and meta-analyses like know if
you stop eating fiber is it gonna kill
you tomorrow or next week or next month
or next year no if you look consistently
and this is I mean it's not we're not
talked about one study and a meta
analyses or systematic review is kind of
looking at a combination of studies that
all have similar variables and outcomes
we're not even talking about just one
systematic review or a couple we're
talking about dozens have come to the
same conclusion which is more fiber is
an independent risk reductive agent for
cardiovascular disease and for cancer
specifically colon cancer I think it's
like 7% decrease for every quintile of
fiber intake goes up do we have a
prescription for the amount of fiber we
should be having a day just like a
general so so a popular one I see throw
it around that I'm not it's hard to say
because actually my advisor Don layman
we talked about this because he was like
you know he's like well she gets a
certain mount of fiber you probably
don't need much more because you've
satisfied your gut microbiota you've got
enough for a digestion you know I've
heard the thrown around 50 15 grams 15
grams per thousand calorie intake I
think that's fine I think once you get
up to those guys like HAP's or that are
on 8,000 calories you probably ought to
start pairing that down because you
don't need to be taking in 120 grams of
fiber a day I would say probably 15
grams per thousand calories with the
caveat that the upper limit should be
probably around 80 grams I would be
going much higher than 80 grams per day
association is 25 grams for females and
35 38 grams for adult males but again I
think my advice to clients is you know
eat an amount of fiber or the most
amount of fiber that you can tolerate
it's not going to be harmful for you and
if you enjoy it and it's really
satisfying that
right okay and what is your prescription
for protein intake as far as protein
goes I think you know the the
meta-analyses for building muscle pretty
clear if you're between one point six to
two point four grams per kilo and let's
just kilo of lean lean body but all
right no no they're actually they're
actually total body weight there's total
body weight that's study so I would just
say there's no downside to two point
four grams per kilo eat two point four
grams per kilo as the minimum if no
difference for women no so it seems to
be just based on lean body mass again
most people if you're having around two
grams per kilo you're gonna be fine if
you want to make sure two point four
grams per per kilo and then there was a
study a systematic review by Eric Helms
and a few people and they showed that
for people who are a calorie deficit
that number might move up a little bit
that up to three grams per kilogram of
lean body mass might be beneficial for
maintaining lean body mass while in the
calorie deficit so yeah that's that's
kind of where we put it but again if you
want to eat more protein there's there's
nothing wrong with that but again when
we get into really really high levels of
protein intake people it can be quite
satiating so also weigh out the training
you're in strength or building muscle
and you are overdoing protein at the
expensive carbs like that probably is
going to have some kind of a detrimental
effect to your performance in the gym
sorry
is it worth then bringing that down to
allow a little bit more room with
carbohydrates to better you know fuel
your performance to get your strength
gains to get
probably yes yeah and then one more
thing I was two more points I would make
you know because like one of the big
myths I feel out there is that people on
performance-enhancing drugs need just so
much more protein
I've seen this be pervasive in the
bodybuilding community they say well
well that's fine for you little tiny
daddy guys put us guys on the sauce we
need you know 5 grams per kilo of
protein so the research shows that kind
of regardless of that what you need to
maximize protein synthesis seems to be
still the same and if you're worried
about protein as a substrate for
building muscle which I think a lot of
guys who take performance-enhancing
drugs the one of the things they worry
about is ok well if I'm building so much
more muscle than somebody's natural I'm
just going to need more protein to build
that muscle well I I can do math so I
can break down exactly how much that is
so if you look at likes let's say 25
kilos of lean body mass in the year and
that's I think most of us would consider
that a very very high amount of lean
body mass even for somebody who's new to
performance-enhancing drugs and takes a
crapload of them that breaks down to on
a per day basis in terms of dry weight
of tissue about 20 to 25 grams so if
you're worried about it
eat your 2.4 grams of protein per kilo
of body mass add 30 grams on top of it
and you're covered but again if you like
if somebody likes more protein there's
no downside to it but for some of these
guys who are so massive and have to eat
such a high food volume protein is very
satiating it might be actually better
for them to pare back some of the prayer
and I've done this with guys who I
worked with I worked with some IFBB pros
who actually brought their protein
intake down they couldn't believe how
much better they felt just through I
guess trace amounts of protein from
other foods that might not necessarily
be high in protein just through sheer
volume then that really just got a
higher amount of protein coming in and
that can come
and that that right music we recommend
so it'd be probably gonna have some yeah
three to eight thousand calories that
you're probably getting a hundred grams
of protein in just just from like your
other sources you know so yeah it's uh
it's interesting but again it's you know
and this is me as a protein guy saying
this I love protein yeah the one other
caveat I'll say is that per day is a
little bit of a misleading number
because the human body has no viable
storage mechanism for protein and one of
the experiments we did in my grad when
my PhD thesis was we actually looked at
okay we're going to equate daily protein
but for one group we're gonna give
almost all of it at night like for
dinner
which is actually a way a lot of people
eat they don't eat much protein
breakfast and lunch and they eat a lot
of dinner so we gave 70% at dinner 15%
of breakfast 15% at lunch and then the
other group we kind of evenly distribute
it now this is in rats so I did that
because I could use a high subject
number and I could control it like I
weighed out every single meal for 110
rats every day for 11 weeks three meals
a day nightmare but at the end of it the
the subjects that we gave the more
evenly distributed protein intake to
cross the day had a little bit bigger
muscles about eight to ten percent
difference in muscle weight so that's
actually been recently kind of
replicated in humans and they saw you
know similar findings not not a bunch
more muscle but some more muscle and it
makes sense because humans don't have
body doesn't have a viable storage
mechanism for protein right like you
can't somebody said well muscles are
storage now it's that's not a storage
unit so you kind of either have to use
those amino acids for anabolism or the
body oxidizes them it uses them for
energy and after a few hours you're kind
of through it so two point four you know
when I recommend a two point four grams
per kilogram lean body mass more if you
want but make sure that you're also
distributing that over you know three to
five meals per day from high quality
protein sources and I think that's kinda
general recommendation that I would give
so this is the only merit to meal timing
is is protein distribution now you just
said three to five meals for someone
who's on a calorie surplus so let's talk
about
me and my audience now people that are
looking to get as much muscle as
possible what would you say the most
ideal amount of times per day they
should be spreading their protein intake
yeah if you put a gun to my head I would
say that four or five mils is probably
better than three but I don't have any
scientific data to back that up when I
first got to grad school and this is
very normal for you know the the early
two-thousands time period the idea was
eight meals a day every two hours
because that way you're gonna have a
constant stream of amino acids coming in
right and I'll try to keep this brief
but one of the coolest things about my
graduate school was it actually changed
the way I ate so I was the first
experiment we did we fed we were gonna
look at okay if we feed a meal that
maxes out a protein synthetic response
how long does that last because nobody's
ever done that and what kind of predicts
how long it lasts so what I figured
would happen was that okay leucine the
amino acid leucine seems to be the
trigger for muscle protein synthesis I
figured okay well however long leucine
is elevated the blood will be how long
we see protein said this is elevated so
I got the data back and this is very
this this is one of the things that
absolutely destroyed my biases it made
me question everything from then on
leucine was still elevated at five hours
post meal ingestion but protein
synthesis had come back to baseline by
three hours and I kept rerunning the
data and rerunning the data and
rerunning it and finally my advisor
who's one of the most brilliant men I've
ever met dr. layman dr. Don layman he
called me into his office and he was
like so where are we with this duration
study and I said well I just gotta run
the data one more time because it's
wrong why is it wrong and we went
through why I thought it was wrong and
he said it sounds like your data is just
fine it sounds like it sounds like
you're trying to torture your data to
fit your hypothesis and what you need to
do is change your hypothesis to fit the
data and that was like a moment so I
started going back to the literature and
I actually found a study where they
infused essential amino acids for six
hours in humans and what they saw was
that protein synthesis went up came
back down at about two hours and then
never came back up again even though
they kept infusing essential amino acids
the entire time so that made me think
holy [__] maybe that's bodybuilders have
been doing this thing wrong the whole
time so I think what that says is that
you probably need a period of time to
for lack of a better term let the system
reset I think that eating too frequently
is probably a downside in terms of
protein synthesis I think eating too
infrequently is probably downside if I
had to pick a sweet spot I think four to
five meals is probably the sweet spot
four to five dosing if you really want
to twist my arm and you say what about
just squeezing the you know squeezing
the last little bit out you know if
you're somebody who wakes up in the
middle of the night anyway which I am
you could always just down a protein
shake real quick you know cuz I always
have to wake up in the middle of the
night to go to the bathroom you could
just down something real quick go back
to bed maybe you're getting a little bit
more than because that's an eight-hour
period where you'd only wouldn't feed
but I would never tell somebody disrupt
your sleep wake up and have a protein
shake but that might be one way to get a
sixth he doesn't do that Sebastian you
just mentioned you know is protein
really the only macronutrient that we
need to be concerned with as far as meal
timing and distribution I actually just
put a an infographic together very
recently on you know meal distribution
meal timing and so this particular study
was looking at two I guess
two meal occasions which were calorie
equated are macro equated and
essentially if they were fed so the
group that was fed at the meal in the
morning actually got a significantly
greater a thermic effect of food then
when they ate the same meal same
calories calories equated at the pm
occasion and it was a significant or a
meaningful amount of calories so that is
a very that was a 2020 publication it
kind of goes against some of the studies
that had previously been published I
guess on you know meal distribution
Zdenek effective food so basically to
kind of summarize what they what they
found was if you are able to eat a
greater percentage of calories in the
morning you may have a better energy
burn from the the metabolism and
breakdown of food on
compared to if you ate the same amount
of food later in the day now that's all
well well and good but for somebody like
me who hates eating all their food in
the morning if I could try that right
let's say I did and then I'm gonna get
to the end of the day and I'm gonna go
damn I'm really hungry I'm with you and
I'm probably just gonna have another
snack and that therefore takes me out of
compliance to my targets and then I'm
gonna gain weight well is that an
effective strategy even though the
science says perhaps it might be a
little bit better if you eat more food
in the morning so again you've got to
really take it back to an individual you
know basis like what suits you there's a
lot of people kind of chase that
perfection with physiological stuff when
in reality compliance is the science
right like especially with fat loss
you've got to start your absolute rock
foundation has to be can I get somebody
to be compliant to this because the best
diet in the world means absolutely
nothing if you can't stick to it and so
what that also means for your strongmen
Sebastian is you need to have meeting
all at night and nothing with the
strongman it's like the the meal timing
I don't think they even think twice
about that it's more about getting
actual calories in yeah and I just find
it easier to to stomach that many bouts
like smaller bouts well I think also
Sebastian a point to hit on is it's I
don't think that meal timing maybe
necessarily doesn't matter at all I
think it might be so small that it's
hard to pick it out because human trials
are extremely messy it's hard to get
high subject numbers it's hard to get
compliance you might miss you know if
we're talking about 5% difference it
might just be too messy to pick it out
right that might be something we don't
we just don't ever see even though it
may be an actual difference I think that
I think that nutrient timing if it
matters probably matters the most for
people who are low calories right so
people who wear their glycogen because
if you are strong man eating 8,000
calories a day your glycogen is topped
off literally all the time you know I
mean does it matter if you
three hours our eating it's not like
2,000 calorie lunch didn't just all the
way run through you you know what I mean
but if you're talking about somebody
who's on 1,500 calories and they're down
to the last lowest bits of body fat
getting ready for a show then maybe they
need to have a higher carbohydrate meal
before their training session because
maybe that's the only time they're gonna
have a reasonable amount of glycogen to
go train so I think again it kind of
depends on the individual and I think
again that's why we don't we try not to
get dogmatic about what we say because
the other one other thing I'll say about
the study she cited is now I've gotten
so skeptical that if something comes out
in one study I go that's great
wake me up when there's about 10 I would
love to hear your conversations all
right I think we've covered most of them
just quickly just touching back on
gluten free and dairy free so unless
you've got in tolerances yeah absolutely
so honestly I had that many people say
oh you know I think I need to be gluten
free I just do better
gluten is one of the FODMAPs so for some
people perhaps you know moving to a
gluten-free diet may be better for them
from the you know better GI symptoms or
sorry they become symptom free but the
blanket recommendation is no it is not
healthier in fact if you look at someone
that's thought and was you know gluten I
was diagnosed with celiac and many years
ago turns out I don't actually carry the
gene so it was a misdiagnosis and some
of the testing was inaccurate but as
someone who had followed a gluten-free
diet for several years it is not easy
it's expensive it's just annoying and
every single point of the day going out
there you know restaurants like I swear
I've had that much saliva from other
people in my food and not a healthier so
you know you're again anything that
blanket rules out food groups is not
necessarily better because you're
minimizing the amount of you know
micronutrients from other foods and say
anything goes for lactose so it is not
healthier to be lactose free it just
it's a pain in the ass for nearly every
single recipe unless you are somebody
that has a left eyes deficiency you do
not carry the enzyme that breaks down
lactose
it is absolutely unnecessary unless you
just want to be cool one story I have
one gal come to me Diana
they swore up and down that they were
gluten intolerant and I kind of you know
went down the road of all right let's
sometimes I just let it go and sometimes
they go oh let's press on this a little
bit and I kind of like went down the
road of alright what are you having
gluten in it it turns out really the
only time she was having gluten was when
she was binge eating alright so she
would try to restrict it and then she
would have something in it kind of go
[__] it
since I'm already gonna feel like crap I
need a bunch of it and I said what are
you are you sure it's gluten and not
just the 2,000 calories that you pound
it down besides I tell you what I want
you to eat two slices of bread tonight
and then let me know how you feel and
the next point I am emails oh my god I'm
not gluten intolerant so I think a lot
of times you know this is mistaking
correlation for causation right like I
eat bread or I eat gluten and I feel bad
okay but your diet is it just gluten you
also ate a bunch of other stuff it's
common I think a lot of people are
familiar with that now so they'll just
jump to the conclusion that all I must
be you know gluten intolerance or I
should be maybe I've got celiac it's a
very simple simple test for that go and
get it you can actually just have a
guest recipe maybe get up some blogs
down and you could find out pretty
quickly if you are or not
but I think something that kind of ends
up being the actual case and the reason
for those GI problems is that they are
somebody that has IBS and the number of
foods the contain for example and like
garlic and onion they are the two
biggest trees for 95 percent of people
with IBS
they'll say oh you know I felt really
bad at this meal and it was a bowl of
pasta and they've had like a spaghetti
posture and then they've also had on
this salad at lunch time they had
something and it was like oh there was
bread croutons in it and then I also had
it with you know a side of bread so it
must be that it's the bread and then I
said well actually you know let's go and
get some tests done it turns out it was
just that the pasta sauce which is
smothered in garlic and onion that
they're putting on their pasta and it
was the garlic bread that came with
their salad that was actually the cause
I'm not actually the bread so I think
people try to draw a connection to
something but it could be so many things
either I really want to speak about it
with you guys and that's definitely the
the vegan carnivore diet and and also
the documentary game changes it's
something that's brought up so many
times from people that are you know
seemingly intelligent people that are
out of our industry they come to us and
they say you know you should do the
vacant thing like I saw this
world-record-holding strong man and it's
like I know that guy really well and and
he's not a vegan just trust me so that
shakes you know it just doesn't sit well
with me when I when I hear these things
and I just I really wanted to I know
that you've done a whole podcast on
debunking the game changes and I want it
on my podcast in the meantime where is
it that our audience can find you guys
yes so just just so we don't get left on
a teaser if you guys want to see more
about the game changes we do have a 40
minute YouTube video where we break it
down the claims and the game changers
and why some of them were insane your
YouTube channel right my youtube channel
as well as I think it's on yours too as
well as bio Lane calm we have you
searched bio Lane game changers my
article will come up it's a 10,000 word
article breaking down all the claims and
then as far as where you can find us by
Alene calm I'm violating on all social
media and then we have just recently
released
our nutrition coaching app carbon diet
coach I just downloaded you want to tell
us quickly a little bit about the app
yeah so this is something that's been in
the works for a long time but basically
what we when we made it and it was
myself Holley our friend Keith Crocker
who's also a registered dietitian
himself and then two for two friends of
ours who did the development of the app
so basically be set out to say all right
we're gonna build this system so that it
coaches like we would coach if we we we
have tried to break it we and we did
break it for a long time because that's
what you do when you test apps and if
they gave us you know an adjustment or
something that didn't make sense or
something we wouldn't do as coaches we
went back to the drawing board it's
basically the way we did it so there's
never gonna be anything that replaces
you know one on one coaching because
there you can never match the the amount
of support that you're going to get from
an actual person which is why we also
offer coaching through team bio Lane but
not everybody can afford hundreds of
dollars a month for nutrition coach so
we wanted to come up with something that
anybody could afford so our app is $10
us per month you can actually it's
actually cheaper than that if you pay
for six months or a year upfront and it
has I mean it's everything you could do
fat loss muscle gain reverse dieting
maintenance and it functions incredibly
well I used it to coach me to drop from
the 105 class the 93 kilo class I
basically maintained all my strength
actually I've gained in my bench press
so it's a it's a coaching app so
basically when you go to the app and you
download it and you pick a plan it will
ask you several different metrics like
what's your weight what's your body fat
you know and if you don't know if you
don't know your body fat don't worry we
have ways to calculate it what are your
activity what's your lifestyle like
what's your activity level I think it's
eight questions in the signup flow and
then what what goal you want your rate
of loss all range of games and you know
how much do you just slide it to yeah
I'd like to lose you know a half a kilo
per week during this fat loss oh you are
in full control of all the metrics you
check in with it weekly like you would a
coach you you know mark your compliance
is it for females that you come into
your minstrel cycle yes or no the coach
will then you know assess your weigh-ins
and you generate your nutrition
requirements give you some props if you
did well it kind of gives you some
feedback and it makes an adjustment
based on the algorithms that we wrote so
amazing exactly what we do you start
let's say you pick fat loss and we may
have made it so customizable that like
for example for most people we recommend
a balanced intake but even within that
we've allowed you to adjust the protein
the carbs and the fats a certain amount
so you can adjust it or you can do we
have a reduced car Bop ssin we have a
ketogenic option we have a plant-based
option okay you have a low-fat option so
we have all these different options so
no matter how you like to eat you can
use this app and then you know when you
start let's say you're losing fat and
you lose a little you lose more weight
than you're supposed to because you know
maybe it's calculated your calories a
little bit too low it will automatically
adjust you up to compensate but we've
also built it with sanity checks so that
it doesn't just you know blast you up
800 calories because you lost too much
one week it's it's very constrained
calculated just like a coach would be
and our feedback so far has been
incredible isolation that's awesome
I think we're 4.7 stars on Apple right
now on iOS and we have over 100 reviews
so it's only it's been out less than a
month and we're approaching 10,000
subscribers so we're really excited
about even if let's say you're in
Germany even if the database is a
specific to your country it will still
find generic food
like rice milk you know all that kind of
stuff whatever and you can also create
custom foods so if there's something
specific to your country that we don't
have you can put it in yourself and then
it's in there for good
there's a lot of customization options
we have a calorie cycling option like if
you want more calories on certain days
if you adjust say your Saturday up it'll
automatically recalculate the rest of
your week so that your weekly budget is
still the same mean we really we tried
to think of everything so we're really
excited about it oh you guys seriously
like my mind has been blown I think I'm
gonna have to listen to these podcasts
myself about a thousand times just to
process all of the information that
you've just provided for us and our
audience that is amazing Holly can you
just share with us your Instagram tag as
well yeah so I'm Holly T Baxter I think
it's the same one YouTube I'm gonna put
them all here for you guys as well
Facebook we don't really thank you so
much best we literally probably had
another 10 questions that we wanted to
ask you so it please will you come back
and do another episode with us we really
wanted to talk about like the difference
between your nutritional approach so
when men and women cuz that's what our
business is about
so if you'd like to come back on we'll
have you any time so we'll talk about
that but thank you so much for joining
us
booking love this episode and I'm sure
our audience is going to as well
[Music]